paper/paper.md, before:

---
title: 'BoxKit: A Python library to manage analysis of block-structured simulation datasets'
tags:
  - Python
  - block structured datasets
  - simulation analysis
  - machine learning
  - performance optimization
authors:
  - name: Akash Dhruv
    orcid: 0000-0003-4997-321X
    affiliation: 1
affiliations:
 - name: Argonne National Laboratory, USA
   index: 1
date: 15 June 2023
bibliography: paper.bib
---

# Summary

BoxKit is a library that provides building blocks to parallelize and 
scale data science, statistical analysis, and machine learning
applications for block-structured simulation datasets. Spatial data
from simulations can be accessed and managed using tools available 
in this library to interface with packages like SciKit, PyTorch, and 
OpticalFlow for post-processing and analysis.

The library provides a Python interface to efficiently access Adaptive 
Mesh Refinement (AMR) data typical of simulation outputs, and leverages
multiprocessing libraries like JobLib and Dask to scale analysis on 
Non-Uniform Memory Access (NUMA) and distributed computing architectures.

# Statement of need

Simulation sofware instruments like Flash-X [@DUBEY2022] store output in 
the form of Hierarchical Data Format (HDF5) datasets. Each dataset is often
gigabytes (GB) in size and requires cache efficient techniques to enable its 
integration with Python packages. BoxKit data structures act as a wrapper around 
simulation output stored in HDF5 files and provide metadata for AMR blocks that 
describe the simulation domain. The wrapper objects are lightweight in nature and
represent chunks of data stored on disk, acting as array like input for Python
functions/methods. This approach allows for selective loading of data from disk to
memory in form of chunks/blocks which improves cache efficiency. The library also enables 
creation of new datasets for data-intensive workflows, and can be extended beyond its current 
application to numerical simulations. 

![BoxKit is designed to integrate simulation software instruments like Flash-X 
with Python-based machine learning and data analysis packages. Large simulation 
datasets (~10 GB) can leverage BoxKit to improve performance of offline training/analysis. 
This mechanism is part of a broader workflow to  integrate simulations with machine 
learning using a Fortran-Python bridge shown with dotted lines. \label{fig:workflow}](../media/workflow.png)

Compared to existing data analysis packages like yt [@yt], BoxKit offers more intuitive 
abstraction layers over AMR blocks through its metadata wrappers. This provides raw access 
to simulation data enabling users to develop their own low-level methods for spatio-temporal 
interpolation and stenciled computations. We aim for this library to complement existing
packages rather than replace them.

BoxKit also offers wrappers to scale the process of deploying workflows on NUMA and distributed
computing architectures by providing decorators that can parallelize Python operations over a
single data structure to operate over a list. This can be understood better using the 
workflow described in \autoref{fig:workflow} that has been applied to data analysis and 
machine learning applications in chemical and thermal science engineering [@DHRUV2023; @HASSAN2023].
Output from Flash-X boiling simulations is created and stored on multinode clusters. Processing 
this output through BoxKit allows for scaling a simple operation over block to a list of blocks as
shown below,

```python

# Decorate function on a block with desired configuration for parallelization
@Action(num_procs, parallel_backend)
def operation_on_block(block, *args):
    pass

# Call the function with list of blocks as the first argument
dset = boxkit.read_datset(...)
operation_on_block((block for block in dset.blocklist), *args)
```

The `Action` wrapper converts the function, `operation_on_block`, into a parallel method which 
can be deployed on a multinode cluster with the desired backend (JobLib/Dask). BoxKit does not
interfere with parallelization schema of target applications like SciKit, OpticalFlow, and PyTorch 
which function independently using available resources.

![Preliminary performance analysis of BoxKit on a single 
22 core IBM Power9 node (L1 cache - 32+32 kilobytes (KiB) per core, 
L2 cache - 512 KiB per core) for operations involving 
calculation of temporal mean across multiple datasets (left), 
and merging block-structured AMR datasets into contiguous 
arrays (right). \label{fig:performance}](../media/performance.png)

\autoref{fig:performance} provides results of performance tests performed 
on a single 22 core node on Summit [@summit] for two basic operations: 
(1) Calculation of temporal mean of heat flux in Flash-X boiling simulations 
$q(x,y,z,t)$, and (2) A block merger operations to convert AMR data into contiguous 
arrays.

Calculation of temporal mean requires operation on data across multiple 
datasets, with each dataset approximately 10 GB in size. Following is 
the mathematical representation of the problem where $Nt$ represents the 
total number of datasets,

\begin{equation}\label{eq:mean}
\overline q = \frac{\sum_{n=1}^{Nt} q(x,y,z,t)}{Nt}
\end{equation}

Loading all the datasets into cache memory at the same time is very 
inefficient for this problem and requires use of BoxKit's metadata
wrappers to efficiently load data chunks from disk, operate locally in space, 
and scale its computation across multiple threads. Based on the graph in 
\autoref{fig:performance} the parallel performance scales better as $Nt$
increases.

Mapping of AMR data to contingous arrays becomes important for applications
where global operations in space are required. An example of this is SciKit's 
``skimage_measure`` method, which can be used to measure bubble shape and size 
for Flash-X boiling simulations. BoxKit improves performance of this operation 
by ~5x.

# Ongoing work

Our ongoing work focuses on using BoxKit to improve performance of Scientific
Machine Learning (SciML) applications and using it as part of a broader workflow 
that integrates Fortran/C++ based applications with state-of-art machine learning 
packages available in Python shown by dotted lines in \autoref{fig:workflow}.

# Acknowledgements

This material is based upon work supported by Laboratory Directed Research 
and Development (LDRD) funding from Argonne National Laboratory, provided by 
the Director, Office of Science, of the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract 
No. DE-AC02-06CH11357.

# References

Commit message:

provide link to preformance data

paper/paper.md, after:

---
title: 'BoxKit: A Python library to manage analysis of block-structured simulation datasets'
tags:
  - Python
  - block structured datasets
  - simulation analysis
  - machine learning
  - performance optimization
authors:
  - name: Akash Dhruv
    orcid: 0000-0003-4997-321X
    affiliation: 1
affiliations:
 - name: Argonne National Laboratory, USA
   index: 1
date: 15 June 2023
bibliography: paper.bib
---

# Summary

BoxKit is a library that provides building blocks to parallelize and 
scale data science, statistical analysis, and machine learning
applications for block-structured simulation datasets. Spatial data
from simulations can be accessed and managed using tools available 
in this library to interface with packages like SciKit, PyTorch, and 
OpticalFlow for post-processing and analysis.

The library provides a Python interface to efficiently access Adaptive 
Mesh Refinement (AMR) data typical of simulation outputs, and leverages
multiprocessing libraries like JobLib and Dask to scale analysis on 
Non-Uniform Memory Access (NUMA) and distributed computing architectures.

# Statement of need

Simulation sofware instruments like Flash-X [@DUBEY2022] store output in 
the form of Hierarchical Data Format (HDF5) datasets. Each dataset is often
gigabytes (GB) in size and requires cache efficient techniques to enable its 
integration with Python packages. BoxKit data structures act as a wrapper around 
simulation output stored in HDF5 files and provide metadata for AMR blocks that 
describe the simulation domain. The wrapper objects are lightweight in nature and
represent chunks of data stored on disk, acting as array like input for Python
functions/methods. This approach allows for selective loading of data from disk to
memory in form of chunks/blocks which improves cache efficiency. The library also enables 
creation of new datasets for data-intensive workflows, and can be extended beyond its current 
application to numerical simulations. 

![BoxKit is designed to integrate simulation software instruments like Flash-X 
with Python-based machine learning and data analysis packages. Large simulation 
datasets (~10 GB) can leverage BoxKit to improve performance of offline training/analysis. 
This mechanism is part of a broader workflow to  integrate simulations with machine 
learning using a Fortran-Python bridge shown with dotted lines. \label{fig:workflow}](../media/workflow.png)

Compared to existing data analysis packages like yt [@yt], BoxKit offers more intuitive 
abstraction layers over AMR blocks through its metadata wrappers. This provides raw access 
to simulation data enabling users to develop their own low-level methods for spatio-temporal 
interpolation and stenciled computations. We aim for this library to complement existing
packages rather than replace them.

BoxKit also offers wrappers to scale the process of deploying workflows on NUMA and distributed
computing architectures by providing decorators that can parallelize Python operations over a
single data structure to operate over a list. This can be understood better using the 
workflow described in \autoref{fig:workflow} that has been applied to data analysis and 
machine learning applications in chemical and thermal science engineering [@DHRUV2023; @HASSAN2023].
Output from Flash-X boiling simulations is created and stored on multinode clusters. Processing 
this output through BoxKit allows for scaling a simple operation over block to a list of blocks as
shown below,

```python

# Decorate function on a block with desired configuration for parallelization
@Action(num_procs, parallel_backend)
def operation_on_block(block, *args):
    pass

# Call the function with list of blocks as the first argument
dset = boxkit.read_datset(...)
operation_on_block((block for block in dset.blocklist), *args)
```

The `Action` wrapper converts the function, `operation_on_block`, into a parallel method which 
can be deployed on a multinode cluster with the desired backend (JobLib/Dask). BoxKit does not
interfere with parallelization schema of target applications like SciKit, OpticalFlow, and PyTorch 
which function independently using available resources.

![Preliminary performance analysis of BoxKit on a single 
22 core IBM Power9 node (L1 cache - 32+32 kilobytes (KiB) per core, 
L2 cache - 512 KiB per core) for operations involving 
calculation of temporal mean across multiple datasets (left), 
and merging block-structured AMR datasets into contiguous 
arrays (right). \label{fig:performance}](../media/performance.png)

\autoref{fig:performance} provides results of performance tests performed 
on a single 22 core node on Summit [@summit] for two basic operations: 
(1) Calculation of temporal mean of heat flux in Flash-X boiling simulations 
$q(x,y,z,t)$, and (2) A block merger operations to convert AMR data into contiguous 
arrays.

Calculation of temporal mean requires operation on data across multiple 
datasets, with each dataset approximately 10 GB in size. Following is 
the mathematical representation of the problem where $Nt$ represents the 
total number of datasets,

\begin{equation}\label{eq:mean}
\overline q = \frac{\sum_{n=1}^{Nt} q(x,y,z,t)}{Nt}
\end{equation}

Loading all the datasets into cache memory at the same time is very 
inefficient for this problem and requires use of BoxKit's metadata
wrappers to efficiently load data chunks from disk, operate locally in space, 
and scale its computation across multiple threads. Based on the graph in 
\autoref{fig:performance} the parallel performance scales better as $Nt$
increases.

Mapping of AMR data to contingous arrays becomes important for applications
where global operations in space are required. An example of this is SciKit's 
``skimage_measure`` method, which can be used to measure bubble shape and size 
for Flash-X boiling simulations. BoxKit improves performance of this operation 
by ~5x.

Raw data for performance results along with corresponding IPython notebooks can
be found in [@boxkit-performance].

# Ongoing work

Our ongoing work focuses on using BoxKit to improve performance of Scientific
Machine Learning (SciML) applications and using it as part of a broader workflow 
that integrates Fortran/C++ based applications with state-of-art machine learning 
packages available in Python shown by dotted lines in \autoref{fig:workflow}.

# Acknowledgements

This material is based upon work supported by Laboratory Directed Research 
and Development (LDRD) funding from Argonne National Laboratory, provided by 
the Director, Office of Science, of the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract 
No. DE-AC02-06CH11357.

# References
